My dad was at the Air Force War College on his way to
Vietnam. We drove over to Maxwell Air Force Base
after graduation before I even shipped out, and my
mom and dad gave us this Morris Minor, a little
English car. Nancy and I were driving back through
Mobile. It had an electrical fuel pump in it, and
those points would stick. So I was going over the
bridge. This is where the tunnel was there, and I
was going over the bridge, And as I went up, that
damn thing was sticking, so I was having to open and
close the door to give it enough of a shock to stick.
And then I thought, well, I'll pull over here in a
parking place, and I'll just tie a string onto it
where I can just yank that string, because we've
got a long ways to go to Galveston, Texas, from
Mobile, Alabama. Well, as I'm sitting there, and
there was a Texas Aggie thing in back window. As I'm
sitting there in Mobile, Alabama, just in this
parking lot, somebody drives by, Texas Aggie,
says, hey, need any help? I said, no, I don't. We
talked for a while. But, I mean, that's gone on.
When I, more recently, as Director for Operations
out at U.S. Inc. PAC, my, I had a Marine Lieutenant
Colonel that worked for me, Dave Close, who's just
an absolute Texas gentleman. Just one of the
nicest men you'll ever meet in your life. Tough,
tough Marine. But it was Dave that came up with the
strategy that we used in East Timor. We were
sitting around my office. And I was lamenting how I
didn't want to do like we did in Bosnia and get
bogged down. I wanted to have some sort of a
rotational presence where we used deployed
forces to go in, get those guys with the machetes,
get the Australians in there to run the operation
because they're always prancing around saying
they ought to be doing stuff. And Dave was the one
that took that vision and made it a strategy, which
even George Bush has talked about. And really a
great guy. So Texas Aggies have been... Of course,
in my squadron, I mentioned I had an executive
officer just everywhere you go. I always, in the
military, I knew I could take an Aggie aside and
say, hey, I really need your help on this one. I
can't explain why, but go work it. There's just
that special relationship. It didn't matter if
the guy was an ensign. our second lieutenant, we
had a relationship, which you just don't develop
with other folks. You do it immediately. And you
know that what you're going to get back is going to
be truthful. It's going to be ethical. It's going
to be the right thing to do from what they know, from
what they're working with. So, no, I think it's
just marvelous. I will tell you, though, today,
walking across campus, I haven't walked across
this direction probably in, gosh, 30-something
years. And I was just amazed at the number of people
that just walked by and, didn't say hi or anything.
I mean, it really kind of took me back. You know, I
felt kind of silly saying howdy or how you doing,
you know, and they just kind of look at you and walk
on. So we've lost a little of that, I think, around
here, which is a shame. Have lost some, but still
compared to the other campuses that I know of.
Yeah, I mean, there was no unfriendliness about
it, but I just didn't feel the same. And it used to
be, you know, you'd see an Aggie, you know, hey,
Giggleman. You don't see much of that anymore.
Everybody kind of looks at you. Some of those
things have gone, which I think is a shame, but
that's all part of growth. We were only 8,000
people in those days here, I think, in 64, 65. Now
the entering freshman class is that big. Did you
ever lose your ring? Knock on wood. I flew combat
with it. That ring, I wouldn't even think of
getting in a jet. uh... without my ring on i'd never
in fact it was a thing in the military they didn't
want you to wear rings for a lot of reasons if you're
shot down it's got your name in it and which was
always kind of stupid because name rank and serial
numbers which you got to give the guys and plus i
never thought the suckers could shoot me down but
they were you know they they were afraid to get
caught on something as you're climbing in out of
the airplane but i i always flew with my ring i never
ever went into combat or even flew an airplane
without my ring i had to get it enlarged a little bit
but Never went anywhere without it. Now, thinking
about other traditions, you didn't have senior
boots, did you? No, and that was always, you know,
like I told you, we thought, boy, we really racked
our brains. But can you imagine the Navy blues with
boots on? You looked just like a Gestapo officer.
And, you know, think about it. That was only
20-something years after the war. And that was a
big deal. You know, we just didn't want to. We
didn't want to do that, but I've always, always,
always regretted that. Did you all come up here for
final review? Oh, you bet. Yes, sir. I would assume
they... Well, of course, I don't know what their
core is down there now, but everybody was in the
core down there, and yes, we did. We sure did. The
changes about co-education and all that came
about while you were a student. Absolutely. What
did you and your buddies think about those
changes? You know, when you were telling that
story here a minute ago about General Rudder, I...
You know, that never bothered us, or it never
seemed to. I don't recall anybody jumping up and
down about it. And you know, an interesting thing
about that, when we started bringing women into
the military, it went, and I recall it going so well
here. Of course, it really happened after I left.
But I always thought it was the right thing to do.
And, you know, and... When we started bringing
women onto combat ships and so forth, I had command
of Mars in Desert Storm and had the first women in
combat. And I went back and talked to Admiral
Borda, who was a subsequent CNO that shot himself,
and he was going to tell me how to do it. And I said,
wait a minute, Admiral, you know, this is not a
difficult thing to do. You know, you respect
people for what they can do, not for what they are or
who they are or how they came about. And that's the
way you handle it. You don't have to go build
special spaces. On my ship, I've got a Velcro thing
up there because you only have so many heads or
toilets on a ship. And one says, occupied women.
Turn to the other and it says, occupied men. And we
just honor it. And I got all my crew together. And I
had officers, female officers. We hadn't gotten
the female enlisted yet. And I said, look, here are
my rules. You know, we're adults, and there's not
going to be any heein and sheein on this ship, and if
I find out about it, I'm going to court-martial
you. Now, respect one another, and let's do our
jobs, and things will be fine. I subsequently had
some folks, one or the other, get out of the Navy,
and they got married, and I'm sure that Just like
Nancy and myself, we weren't supposed to be
married, but we eloped to Angleton in 1966. I just
loved her, and she loved me. There wasn't any
reason to go do it. We just did. How did you all meet?
On a blind date. I had the duty in Galveston. She was
a telephone operator in Texas City. I happened to
have the duty. and Carl Fanning, who was there last
night with his two sons, walked in with his wife
that was sitting next to him, and Nancy, and
introduced us, and I'd had a real rough night the
night before, so my eyes were real red, so I was
wearing my sunglasses, and I'm sitting there at
the duty and all this, and I found out later that
when they walked out, Carl asked Nancy, he said,
well, what did you think about him? And she said
something to the effect of, well, I don't know, I
couldn't see his eyes. And then we had a date
subsequent to that in Galveston, I don't know how
familiar you are with Galveston, but the the what
is now the opera house used to be a movie theater and
we had our first date and it was a you know there's a
post between us and and then we went to a party or
something and I told her I loved her and she says oh
yeah I understand I've got your routine and and
then it just worked out and it's 36 years ago well
actually I was 30 I was 65 so so you what year in
school were you I was a junior when we got married. I
was a sophomore when this happened, a junior. Then
you moved off campus? Nope. I stayed on campus. As a
matter of fact, here I was, the Corps Commander. I
got married in December of 66, and in January I
became the commander down there. And I wasn't the
only one that was married. And we were kind of under
an obligation not to be married, but other folks
had done it, and you just didn't advertise it.
Nancy and I didn't. But the rest of the cadets down
there thought I was really a he-man. Because I'd go
out after I finished studying at night about 10
o'clock and go over to Lamarck. And Nancy and I had a
room in her house that we were living in. And then
I'd get up early the next morning and these guys
said, that guy Picket Man, he's out all night. And
God, look at him. This guy is amazing. And of
course, my grades just went up. Exponentially,
because now all of a sudden, I have the potential of
having a family to support. We didn't have one. Our
daughter was born five years later, but it was,
yeah. All right, so when you come up then for final
review, who is here from your family and your loved
ones? Well, my parents were here, and Nancy was
here, and I think my in-laws, I think, came up. My
brother was going to school here, so I know he was
here. He was in Seagram 7. And I think that was
pretty much it. And
where were you guys in the order? I think we were
last. Last? I think we were tail end Charlie. But
nobody made fun of you? No, no. We always felt very
comfortable on campus. Everybody except us. You
know, you're an Aggie. So it doesn't matter. You
know, it doesn't matter as far as I could tell. What
creates that attitude? I don't know. I think
people that come here come here knowing that's the
way it is. And I think that's what fosters it. It's a
pride. It's an association with folks that you
know before you ever come here. So all it really All
you really do is resubstantiate that the longer
you're here and around people that are here. Did it
matter what your ancestry was or your family?
Never, never. You know, I can't remember ever,
ever having anyone say anything that was
derogatory. I mean, about anyone or anything. You
know, well... Ernie Catanzaro, or Sonny
Catanzaro that I was just talking about was of
Mexican, Hispanic descent. No one ever called him
a Whitback or any of that kind of stuff. I'm trying
to think, I don't think we had any blacks here that I
can recall. We may have, at least in 65. Somewhere
about then is when it came in, but But that wouldn't
have been anything. I mean, I just, it never just,
it never occurred to me one way or the other and it
wouldn't have mattered one way or the other. I
just, I think it's just something that people come
here with and it just grows while you're here and
then as you get older and it just, you know, you look
back on it and it's just the right thing to do.
Ethical thing. As you go through commencement,
every name is called, every hand is shaken. Yes,
sir. We're all in our Navy dress whites and Vietnam
is already Oh, Vietnam's still going on big time.
What kind of world did you think you were going out
into? Well, my first trip in the Merchant Marines
was to Vietnam, and I came back from that. I stayed
in the Merchant Marines long enough, you know,
because I wanted to fly combat, and, you know, and
our whole class used to talk about that, you know,
even as freshmen, that, you know, we're here to
serve. You know, that's what we're being trained
to do, and, you know, And we had a whole bunch of
folks that went off to Vietnam. My roommate, Terry
Archer, I had no idea about this. We were in Naples,
Florida about two months ago with him, he and his
wife. And the gals had gone off shopping. And Terry
had this Vietnam book laying on his desk there. And
I thought Terry, he was a great golfer. He was on the
golf team here and really a super golfer. And I
said, Terry, what the heck are you really doing in
Vietnam? It's funny, he and I had never talked
about that because we'd seen each other for years.
And we're both sitting in the lounge. She says,
well, he says, you know, I was at Anlock and here and
there. And I said, I thought you were doing golf
courses or something. He says, no. And I said, boy,
you must have really seen some action then. And he
says, yeah. And I said, I was talking about some
friends of mine that got wounded. And I said,
you're lucky to get out of there without getting
shot. And he said, I did get shot. And I said, Terry,
you never told me this. Well, it turns out he got
shot in the rear end. And he was afraid that his dad,
who was a colonel, like my dad, would say, if you
got, those old guys, you got shot in the back or the
rear, you were running. And he says, all I did was
just turn and jump over to get behind something. He
said, I only went about four feet. He said, I was
always afraid my dad would think I was a coward,
which is kind of interesting. How well prepared
did you think A&M had made you for that real world?
Let me tell you, that's a great story. Since
graduation, I picked up two master's degrees.
I've been two fellowships at Harvard and in
national security at the Kennedy School of
Government. And I will tell you, and I've gone to
the war college, the Naval War College, and it did a
wonderful job, absolutely wonderful job. Yeah,
it was just awesome. What did it do that was right?
Well, one, I learned right from wrong. I always use
the term do the right thing. I learned that here.
Regardless, stand up for what you think is right.
And if you're right, you may lose in the short term,
but in the long term, you're going to be right. And
it's almost, I used to tell, I still tell Nancy, I
said, you know, sometimes I think people just,
just want to push me along so you want to see what
I'll do next. You know, because I've always kind of
taken things on that I don't like status quo. I like
to make things better. And like women in combat, I
didn't have a problem with that. And it was going to
work and it was going to work right. And we've had
some other things. We fight fires in the Navy now, I
changed. In fact, I was talking to some firemen in
Galveston yesterday about this, is that you
don't, you know, we don't go running into
buildings. Like, you know, why do firemen feel
they have to run into a house that's already been
evacuated? You know, you want to contain it, and
you're not going to save a lot of stuff anyway. You
know, don't risk, we do some funny things, you
know, under a guise of, being brave but we need to be
careful now in this what just happened those guys
were absolutely doing the right thing I mean who
knew that the towers were going to fall and look at
all the people they saved and they are heroes been
on a ship and in other areas we know people are out
and all this there is stuff we'll let it go so I've
always so it's that kind of it's that kind of stuff
it this school allows you to think on your two on
your feet I think the stress they put us through and
so forth in the Corps was good uh Was there good
attention to being an individual?
I felt like an individual, but I also felt like I was
part of a team.
Teamwork to me has always been important. I don't
need superstars. In the Navy, I used to tell my
folks that, like on an aircraft carrier, I said,
you know, I don't need a bunch of, you know, a couple
of superstars. What I need are 6,000 folks that are
all pulling the same direction. and folks that
will come in and tell you, hey, Admiral, that's not
the right thing to do, or Captain, that's not the
right thing to do, and stand there and take a wrath.
But then, kind of like you mentioned with River
Rudder, you know, I've made a lot of phone calls
after it was over and said, hey, listen, come back
in here. You were right. I was wrong. If you were
hired now as a consultant to advise Texas A&M's
leadership about what to do or not to do in the
future, what advice would you give them?
What should A&M emphasize? Let me just give you a
philosophy that I have discovered over the years
and partly by the two fellowships at Harvard
because you get a chance to dialogue on this. They
were national security seminars. So you're
generally talking about Russia and how we should
send $3 billion there. There's some pretty
high-powered folks coming there and lecture. You
know, every time we do this, or we did it as a group,
and there were 30 military senior officers and 30
senior civilians from industry and from the Civil
Service, we always came back with the most
important national security issue being
education. We have somehow got to figure out how to
get into these back areas and get people that
understand that may not even have the grades, only
because they haven't had a chance to have the
grades. They've had to do other stuff. And somehow
get those youngsters to be a productive member of
society. And that takes education. Education is
the absolute key to the security of this country
and the security of this world. Because the more
you can educate people, the more people are
educated in the right way, the less apt they are to
be Osama bin Laden's, to be the Taliban. I mean,
look what he's doing with the women over there. The
reason he's doing it is because if you don't
educate them, you don't have to worry about them.
You know, they consider themselves stupid. And
that's something we've got to do in this country.
And right here in Texas, you know, you don't have to
drive very many streets in Galveston to see people
that haven't had that opportunity. Or in Houston,
it's all over the place. People that are smart
don't go rob banks in 7-Elevens and those kinds of
things. And somehow we've got to find a way to do
that. And I don't know if it's a prep school to get
someone ready to go to school here or what? But that
would be a vision that I would have is how do we take
this wonderful stuff that we do and get it down to
the lowest levels to people that on just the front,
they don't have the credentials But inside they
do, and they just haven't had the chance to do it.
Because, you know, we always, the Colin Powell's,
what do they do? They move out of the areas. And all
of them do. I mean, all these folks move out of the
areas because they somehow were able to bring
themselves up, but we need that leadership down
there to get the rest of the crowd out. As you look
back on your A&M years, to whom are you most
grateful, feel indebtedness to? If they were all
here today, to whom would you most want to express
your appreciation? Probably to a fellow by the
name of Jim Hopkins, who was my navigation
instructor. He was a really tough, tough
taskmaster. And to Mrs. Thiel, who was my Spanish
instructor. In a school that was all boys, all men,
Mrs. Thiel brought almost a mother side to things.
Is that T-H-E-I-L? T-H-E-I-L. Her husband is a
doctor in Galveston and is a... I'm an admiral in
the Texas Navy and he's the CNO of the Texas Navy.
And really a great lady. I haven't seen her in
probably 30 years, but she's a wonderful lady. But
those two folks probably... more than anybody
else.
I'm about through with the questions. Are there
any things we haven't covered that we should have?
No, I think I've probably talked way too much. I
haven't talked like this in years. If someone
walks up to you and gives you a check for a million
dollars with one condition, you must pass it on to
Texas A&M, but you decide the use to be made of that
money, what would you want done with that money? I
would start a school, just like I said, a prep
school that would... that would go into the inner
reaches. I'm not talking about just blacks or
Hispanics. I'm talking about Caucasians. I would
start some kind of a school, prep school, that
would get people ready to meet that top 10%, even
though they haven't had a chance in their high
school years to do it. Because I think there's a...
I think there's that whole group of society out
there that we're overlooking, that somehow we
have to bring into this world that we live in so we
don't become elitist. That's just. All right, my
last question then. What feelings do you carry in
your heart for Texas A&M? Great love. Great love.
It's a wonderful place.